Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we will learn how to create our own brand new completely custom rest API you are now.
Now, before we learn how to do this, let's first go over why we would do this.
So we know that there are these rest API URLs like this.
For example, this one will display JSON data for the ten most recent blog posts.
Or we could go to slash pages or we could go to media or users.
You get the idea.
There are all sorts of built in WordPress, rest API you URLs that will let you fetch just about any
data that you're looking for.
And also, instead of just posts and pages, we could also try to visit a custom post type.
So, for example, Professor.
Now, by default, a custom post type will not be included in the rest API, so that's why we see an
error message here.
However, in order to get the professor post type to show up in the rest API, we are just one simple
change away.
So check this out right now in your text editor instead of your theme folder, I want you to open up
the M.
You must use plugins folder and within AMMU plug ins.
Let's jump into our university post type's file.
Right.
This is the file where we register different post types.
Let's scroll down to professors or I should say singular professor without an S and all we need to do
is add a property within this associative array.
So maybe right before the supports line, the ordering doesn't matter, but let's say show in rest and
just set it to equal.
True.
OK, now, as soon as we save this now, we can indeed receive Rodgerson data for the ten most recently
created professors.
Now, at this point, you might be wondering if it's that easy to include custom post types in the rest
API.
If that's all it took, then why would we bother creating our own brand new API URLs?
Right.
Why don't we just use this Appu URL?
Well, let me give you a real world example.
So in our search overlay, we don't only want to search for posts and pages.
So if I search for Buyology, I also want to see a link to the biology program.
And also I want to see professors that teach biology.
And I also want to see any campuses where biology is taught.
And finally, I also want to see any upcoming events that are related to biology.
However, WordPress is built in search.
Logic is not very advanced.
And so sometimes we need to take matters into our own hands.
Let me show you what I mean back at this rest API URL for the professor post type.
If we add on at the very end, questionmark search equals then we can enter any keyword that we want
to search for.
So for example, I know that I have a professor named Dr. Bachs a lot.
So if I say search equals Bachs a lot, the search is successful and now we only see the JSON data for
that.
One post for the doctor barks a lot, Professor.
However, if instead of barks a lot, I search for biology, then we see zero results.
And this can be confusing at first because we know that we have professors that teach biology.
Right?
If I go on to my website and click on programs and then biology, we know that we have two biology professors,
right?
Dr. Bachs lot.
Dr. Miaows a lot.
Now, the reason those professors are not showing up when I run this search is because the native WordPress
search logic only searches within really obvious fields like the title field and the main body content
field.
WordPress doesn't know to search within our custom fields, and even if it did, it wouldn't know how
to interpret the relationships that we set up between different post types.
Right, like between a program and a professor or a program and a campus.
So that's the bad news.
But the good news is that if we create our own brand new completely custom API neutral, well, then
we can do whatever we want and we can code our own new custom search logic, logic that will indeed
be aware of relationships between different posts and post types.
OK, now, before we get started and begin coding our new custom API u RL, before we get into that,
I want to go over the four main reasons of why we're doing this.
So number one out of four is what we just talked about.
We need our own custom search logic.
Reason number two is so we can customize things to send back way less raw JSON data because the default
WordPress, API URLs, they send back literally everything about a post.
It gives us the date.
It gives us the actual body content field, just a whole bunch of stuff when really in terms of our
search overlay, all we really need is the title A Permalink.
And in the case of Prof's, maybe a Eurail to a thumbnail image.
Now that would be way less data to send back, which means the search would load faster for our visitors,
especially if someone was on a slow mobile connection.
Reason number three is so that our front end JavaScript can just send one single get JSON request instead
of six.
Right, because the default API URLs, they only return a single post type at a time.
Right.
You've got one you URL for posts, another four pages, another for Prof's.
Whereas if we code our own new API URL, we can search and work with all six post types at once so that
can speed things up a bit as well.
And finally, reason number four is that this is quite literally the perfect exercise to sharpen our
skills, the act of trying to search for just the right data and then needing to format the data into
just the right structure.
That's the perfect recipe for strengthening your skills.
It's going to be a tremendous learning experience.
So without further ado, let's get started the.
First step is to jump into your text editor and for the time being, we can forget about the Mew Plugins
folder.
And let's jump back to our theme folder, OK, within the theme folder, open up functions.
Now, we could just start writing all of the new code right here within this file, but a bit of a spoiler
alert.
We are going to be writing a good amount of code and I don't want our functions file to become huge
and unmaintainable.
So a good way to stay organized is to create a brand new separate file.
And then we can just include or require in that file right here.
Technically, you could create the new file anywhere within your theme folder.
But just to stay organized, why don't we create a new subfolder named includes or we can even just
name it I n c for sure.
The name of the folder does not matter, just personal preference.
So if I write, click on the theme folder and choose a new folder and give it a name of I n c four includes,
feel free to name it, whatever you want.
But then within that new subfolder, let's create a new file.
And for now, let's just open up.
That's all we need for now.
Let's save this file.
And the name of this file definitely does not matter.
But just to make sense, I'm going to name it.
Search Dash Routt dot p p.
Cool, so now we've got our new subfolder, and that's where the new fire lives now back and functions
pop up at the top here.
Let's just write a new line of code that pulls in or requires in that separate file.
So to do that, we can just say require and then a space.
And then there's a WordPress function named Get the file path.
And for the argument, we can just say quotes forward slash and then look inside the ANC subfolder and
then just type out the name of your brand new separate file.
So for me, that search dash route.
OK, let's go ahead and save this function's file.
And really quick, I just want to stress the fact that you do not need to do this in order to create
a custom rest API you.
This has nothing to do with the task at hand.
This is just a general tip for staying organized.
If you wanted to, you could break down each one of these current functions.
We've written into its own separate file.
You could have one for this, another one for our page banner function, and then you could just have
several of these require in lines.
It's totally up to you.
But let's get back to the task at hand.
So now let's jump into that brand new separate file that we just created, search dash route.
And the first thing we want to do is add an action so the WordPress function, add action for the first
argument.
We just list the WordPress event we want to hook on to.
We've already used this once and that is reste API init.
And then the second argument is a function that we want to run at that moment.
We can make up any function name we want.
But why don't we go with university register search?
I just made up this name.
There's nothing magical about it.
Now let's go ahead and create a function with this exact name so we can say function and then match
that name.
So university register, search parentheses, curly brackets.
And now within the body of this function, this is where the naming does need to be specific.
There is a WordPress function named Register Reste wrapped in this function takes three arguments.
So just as a placeholder, let's say A, B, C, the first argument is the namespace that you want to
use.
But what does that mean?
What in the world is a namespace?
Well, remember, our goal is that we want to create a new rest API you URL.
Now, if we look at this default epidural for the professor post type, the namespace of this you URL
is WP and WP indicates that this is a default part of the core of WordPress.
So when we are coding, we don't want to use the WP namespace because we are likely not working on the
core of WordPress.
We are working on our own custom features.
Right, probably either a theme or a plug in.
So back in our code for our namespace, why don't we just say university?
You want to choose a name that's fairly unique so that you won't run into any conflicts with plug ins.
OK, now the second argument is the root.
So what is a root?
Well, in this case of this API URL for the professor post type, in this instance, the word professor
is the root.
Or if we go back to posts now, the word posts is the root root.
So the root is the ending part of the euro.
It's the specific thing that you want to do.
So for our root, why don't we say search?
OK, now, before we move on and talk about the third argument, I want to answer a question you might
have right now, because back in the address bar, you might be wondering, well, what is the V two?
If this is the namespace and this is the root, where does version two come into play?
Well, technically, that's just part of the namespace.
It's always a good idea to include V one or V two.
So that way, if anyone else was using your API and you make huge changes to it, instead of pulling
the rug out from underneath someone's feet, if you need to make huge changes, you can just bump this
up to V three or four.
So that way, once other people start depending on and using your API, you never really change any
of the existing URLs.
You can just add a new version if necessary.
So long story short, the version number is just part of the namespace.
So as a good practice within our name of university, within these quotes, we could just add on a slash
V1.
Right, because this is the first version of what we are building.
All right.
Now, let's talk about the third argument.
This is where we simply supply an array, the.
Describes what should happen when someone visits this euro, so within the parentheses for this array,
let's drop down, just stay organized and now we just build out an associative array.
The first name that we want to target is Method's.
So let's just set that to a temporary X placeholder.
And the other name that we want to target is callback.
So when we see the word methods, I want you to think of the CRUD acronym, remember S.R. U.D., which
stood for Create, Read, Update and delete, or in other words, when someone visits this, you URL,
what are they trying to do?
Well, in our case, they're just trying to load or read data.
And the technical way of doing that is by sending a get request.
So instead of this placeholder, let's say quotes gipped, now this value of git will almost always
work.
But if you want to go the extra mile and make sure that your code will work on every Web host out there
instead of quotes git, we can say WPE rest server, colon, colon readable.
And this is just a WordPress constant.
That's basically just going to substitute it for a value of git.
But depending on the type of web host you're using, it might use a slightly different value instead
of git.
So this is the safest way of doing things.
OK, and then finally, let's address callback.
We want to set this to a function and then whatever this function returns is the JSON data that will
be displayed.
So instead of this placeholder, let's just make up a function name could be anything.
Why don't we call it university search results?
OK, and now our final step is to just create a function with this exact name.
So down at the very bottom, let's just say function, then match that name.
So university search results, parentheses, curly brackets.
And now just as a test, let's return a string of text that says congratulations, you created a root
and then at the very end include a semicolon.
All right.
Now let's go ahead and save this file and jump over to the browser and test out our New York URL.
So up in the address bar after the root of your WordPress install, let's add on slash WP, JSON, and
then instead of WP, we use our new namespace, which was university.
And remember, we said university slash V1, then a slash and then just the name of our route, which
we named search.
Perfect congratulations, you created a rout and that's going to bring this lesson to a close in our
next lesson, we will learn how to do something actually useful here.
Right.
And return real WordPress content and raw JSON data instead of this placeholder message should be a
lot of fun.
Let's keep it rolling and I'll see you then.